# Tetiaroa_Coral_Trait_Composition
This repository is associated with the manuscript: Sasha Hills*1, Rosalie A. Wright1,2, Kaya Malhi1, Cassandra E. Benkwitt4, Hannah E. Epstein5, Nicholas A. J. Graham4, Stephanie J. Green3, Julia K. Briand3, Pirta Palola1, Courtney E. Stuart1, Melissa Ward1,6, Teva Salmon7 , Yadvinder Malhi1,8  and Lisa M. Wedding1 (in review). Biophysical characteristics shape functional traits and life-history strategies across an atoll seascape. 

Abstract Coral reef ecosystems are vital for global ocean and human health. However, human-induced stressors override the influence of natural biophysical drivers that have shaped coral reefs for millennia and have eroded coral reef resilience to environmental change. Biophysical drivers filter the coral community composition by selecting for traits suited to the unique environmental context. The resulting coral community provides the reef structure, whilst the associated functional traits contribute significantly to coral reef ecosystem functioning. Therefore understanding the influence of biophysical drivers on coral traits can provide insights into coral reef community characteristics, functioning and responses to environmental change. Here, we show that ~75% of the hard coral community on a remote Pacific atoll (Tetiaroa) harbors stress-tolerant life-history strategies, and dominant traits include sub-massive growth forms, spawning and gonochoric sexual systems. These findings provide evidence for the recent identification of the region's coral reefs as some of the most resilient in the world to climate change. Multivariate regression analysis was used to identify the key biophysical drivers of coral community trait composition including depth, nutrient enrichment and intercardinal bearing. Spatial variability in coral trait composition between sites was largely due to wave exposure, which was highly variable across the atoll. Our results align with Tetiaroa’s socio-ecological context and highlight the relationships between natural drivers and traits that promote resilience. Traits-based approaches can inform more successful coral reef management and restoration efforts in Tetiaroa and globally by providing predictive power of coral community responses and building resilience to future environmental change. 

You are welcome to use and borrow from this code base in accordance with the license below. Please contact Sasha Hills (@sashagabriellehills@gmail.com) if you have questions about this work. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
